<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>V</h2>
				<h3>Chance-Medley</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In his dreams Alastair was persistently conscious of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd’s face, which hung like a great sun in that dim landscape. Fresh-coloured and smiling at one moment, it would change suddenly to a thing peaked and hunted, with aversion and fear looking out of narrow eyes. And it mixed itself oddly with another face, a pale face framed in a high coat collar, and adorned with a very sharp nose. It may have been the supper or it may have been the exceeding hardness of the bed, but his sleep was troubled, and he woke with that sense of having toiled furiously which is the consequence of nightmare. He had forgotten the details of his dreams, but one legacy remained from them⁠—a picture of that sharp-nosed face, and the memory of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd’s open countenance as he had surprised it for one second the night before. As he dressed the recollection paled, and presently he laughed at it, for the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd who now presented himself to his memory was so honest and generous and steadfast that the other picture seemed too grotesque even for a caricature.</p>
			<p>On descending to breakfast he found, though the day was yet early, that his companion had been up and gone a good hour before. Had he left a message? The landlady said no. What road had he taken? The answer was a reference to a dozen unknown place names, for countryfolk identify a road by the nearest villages it serves. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd’s energy roused his emulation. He breakfasted hastily, and twenty minutes later was on the road.</p>
			<p>The mist had cleared, and a still November morn opened mild and grey over a flat landscape. The road ran through acres of unkempt woodlands where spindlewood and briars glowed above russet bracken, and then over long ridges of lea and fallow, where glimpses were to be had of many miles of smoky-brown forest, with now and then a slender wedge of church steeple cutting the low soft skies. Alastair hoped to get a fresh horse at Flambury which would carry him to Chester, and as his present beast had come far, he could not press it for all his impatience. So as he jogged through the morning his thoughts had leisure to wander, and to his surprise he found his mind enjoying an unexpected peace. He was very near the brink of the torrent; let him make the most of these last yards of solid land. The stormy October had hastened the coming of winter, and the autumn scents had in most places yielded to the strong clean fragrance of a bare world. It was the smell he loved, whether he met it in Morvern among the December mosses, or on the downs of Picardy, or in English fields. At other times one smelled herbage and flowers and trees; in winter one savoured the essential elements of water and earth.</p>
			<p>In this mood of content he came after midday to a large village on the borders of Stafford and Shropshire, where he halted for a crust and a jug of ale. The place was so crowded that he judged it was market day, and the one inn had a press about its door like the visiting hours at a debtors’ prison. He despaired of forcing an entrance, so commissioned an obliging loafer to fetch him a tankard, while he dismounted, hitched his bridle to the signpost, and seated himself at the end of a bench which ran along the inn’s frontage.</p>
			<p>The ale was long in coming, and Alastair had leisure to observe his neighbours. They were a remarkable crowd. Not villagers clearly, for the orthodox inhabitants might be observed going about their avocations, with many curious glances at the strangers. They were all sizes and shapes, and in every variety of dress from fustian to camlet, but all were youngish and sturdily built, and most a trifle dilapidated. The four men who sat on the bench beside him seemed like gamekeepers out of employ, and were obviously a little drunk. In the throng at the door there were horse-boys and labourers and better-clad hobbledehoys who might have been the sons of yeomen. A raffish young gentleman with a greyhound and with a cock of his hat broken was engaged in an altercation with an elderly fellow who had a sheaf of papers and had mounted a pair of horn spectacles to read them. Through the open window of the tap-room floated scraps of argument in a dozen varieties of dialect.</p>
			<p>Alastair rubbed his eyes. Something in the sight was familiar. He had seen it in Morvern, in the Isles, in a dozen parts of France and Spain, when country fellows were recruited for foreign armies. But such things could not be in England, where the foreign recruiter was forbidden. Nor could it be enlistment for the English regiments, for where were the bright uniforms and the tuck of drums? The elderly man with the papers was beyond doubt a soldier, but he had the dress of an attorney’s clerk. There was some queer business afoot here, and Alastair set himself to probe it.</p>
			<p>His neighbour on the bench did not understand his question. But the raffish young man with the greyhound heard it, and turned sharply to the speaker. A glance at Alastair made his voice civil.</p>
			<p>“Matter!” he exclaimed. “The matter, sir, is that I and some two-score honest men have been grossly deceived. We are of Oglethorpe’s, enlisted to fight the Spaniard in the Americas. And now there is word that we are to be drafted to General Wade, as if we were not gentleman-venturers but so many ham-handed common soldiers. Hark, sir!”</p>
			<p>From within the inn came a clatter of falling dishes and high voices.</p>
			<p>“That will be Black Benjamin warming to work,” said the young man, proffering a pewter snuff-box in which there remained a few grains of rappee. “He is striving in there with the Quartermaster-Sergeant while I seek to convince Methody Sam here of the deceitfulness of his ways.”</p>
			<p>The elderly man, referred to as Methody Sam, put his spectacles in his pocket, and revealed a mahogany face lit by two bloodshot blue eyes. At the sight of Alastair he held himself at attention, for some instinct in him discerned the soldier.</p>
			<p>“I ain’t denyin’ it’s a melancholy business, sir,” he said, “and vexatious to them poor fellows. They was recruited by Gen’ral Oglethorpe under special permission from His Majesty, God bless ’im, for the dooty of keeping the Spaniards out of His Majesty’s territory of Georgia in Ameriky, for which purpose they ’as signed on for two years, journeys there and back included, at the pay of one shilling per lawful day, and all vittles and clothing provided ’andsome. But now ’Is Majesty thinks better on it, and is minded to let Georgia slip and send them lads to General Wade to fight the Scotch. It’s a ’ard pill to swallow, I ain’t denyin’ it, but orders is orders, and I ’ave them express this morning from Gen’ral Oglethorpe, who is a-breakin’ the news to the Shropshire Companies.”</p>
			<p>One of the drunkards on the bench broke into a flood of oaths which caused Methody Sam to box his ears. “Ye was enlisted for a pious and honourable dooty, and though that dooty may be changed the terms of enlistment is the same. No foul mouth is permitted ’ere, my lad.”</p>
			<p>The young gentleman with the greyhound was listening eagerly to what was going on indoors. “Benjamin’s getting his dander up,” he observed. “Soon there will be bloody combs going. Hi! Benjy!” he shouted. “Come out and let’s do the job fair and foursquare in the open. It’s a high and holy mutiny.”</p>
			<p>There was no answer, but presently the throng at the door began to fan outward under pressure from within. A crowd of rough fellows tumbled out, and at their tail a gypsy-looking youth with a green bandana round his head, dragging a small man, who had the air of having once been in authority. Alastair recognised the second of the two non-commissioned officers, but while one had protested against oaths the other was filling the air with a lurid assortment. This other had his hands tied with a kerchief, and a cord fastening the joined palms to his knees, so that he presented a ridiculous appearance of a man at his prayers.</p>
			<p>“Why hain’t ye trussed up Methody?” the gypsy shouted to the owner of the greyhound.</p>
			<p>The sergeant cast an appealing eye on Alastair. There seemed to be no arms in the crowd, except a cudgel or two and the gypsy’s whinger. It was an appeal which the young man’s tradition could not refuse.</p>
			<p>“Have patience, gentlemen,” he cried. “I cannot have you prejudging the case. Forward with your prisoner, but first untie these bonds. Quick.”</p>
			<p>The gypsy opened his mouth in an insolent refusal, when he saw something in the horseman’s eye which changed his mind. Also he noted his pistols, and his light travelling sword.</p>
			<p>“That’s maybe fair,” he grunted, and with his knife slit his prisoner’s bonds.</p>
			<p>“Now, out with your grievances.”</p>
			<p>The gypsy could talk, and a very damning indictment he made of it. “We was ’listed for overseas, with good chance of prize money, and a nobleman’s freedom. And now we’re bidden stop at home as if we was lousy lobsters that took the King’s money to trick the gallows. Is that fair and English, my sweet pretty gentleman? We’re to march to-morrow against the naked Highlanders that cut out a man’s bowels with scythes, and feed their dogs with his meat. Is that the kind of fighting you was dreaming of, my precious boys? No, says you, and we’ll be damned, says you, if we’ll be diddled. Back we goes to our pretty homes, but with a luckpenny in our pocket for our wasted time and our sad disappointment. Them sergeants has the money, and we’ll hold them upside down by the heels till we shake it out of them.”</p>
			<p>Methody Sam replied, looking at Alastair. “It’s crool ’ard, but orders is orders. Them folks enlisted to do the King’s commands and if ’Is Majesty ’appens to change ’is mind, it’s no business o’ theirs or mine. The money me and Bill ’as is Government money, and if they force it from us they’ll be apprehended and ’anged as common robbers. I want to save their poor innocent souls from ’anging felony.”</p>
			<p>The crowd showed no desire for salvation. There was a surge towards the two men and the gypsy’s hand would have been on the throat of Methody Sam had not Alastair struck it up. The smaller of the two non-commissioned officers was chafing his wrists, which his recent bonds had abraded, and lamenting that he had left his pistols at home.</p>
			<p>“What made you come here with money and nothing to guard it?” Alastair asked.</p>
			<p>“The General’s orders, sir. But it was different when we was temptin’ them with Ameriky and the Spaniards’ gold. Now we’ll need a file o’ loaded muskets to get ’em a step on the road. Ay, sir, we’ll be fort’nate if by supper time they’ve not all scattered like a wisp o’ snipes, takin’ with ’em ’Is Majesty’s guineas.”</p>
			<p>“Keep beside me!” Alastair whispered. A sudden rush would have swept the little man off, had not Methody Sam plucked him back.</p>
			<p>“Better yield quiet,” said the gypsy. “We don’t want no blood-lettin’, but we’re boys as is not to be played with. Out with the guineas, tear up the rolls, and the two of ye may go to Hell for all we care.”</p>
			<p>“What are you going to do?” Alastair asked his neighbours.</p>
			<p>The little man looked bleakly at the crowd. “There don’t seem much of a chance, but we’re bound to put up a fight, seein’ we’re in charge of ’Is Majesty’s property. That your notion, Sam?”</p>
			<p>The Methody signified his assent by a cheerful groan.</p>
			<p>“Then I’m with you,” said Alastair. “To the inn wall? We must get our backs protected.”</p>
			<p>The suddenness of the movement and the glint of Alastair’s sword opened a way for the three to a re-entrant angle of the inn, where their flanks and rear were safe from attack. Alastair raised his voice.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen,” he said, “as a soldier I cannot permit mutiny. You will not touch a penny of His Majesty’s money, and you will wait here on General Oglethorpe’s orders. If he sees fit to disband you, good and well; if not, you march as he commands.”</p>
			<p>Even as he spoke inward laughter consumed him. He, a follower of the Prince, was taking pains that certain troops should reach Wade, the Prince’s enemy. Yet he could not act otherwise, for the camaraderie of his profession constrained him.</p>
			<p>The power of the armed over the unarmed was in that moment notably exemplified. There was grumbling, a curse or two, and sullen faces, but no attempt was made to rush that corner where stood an active young man with an ugly sword. The mob swayed and muttered, the gypsy went off on an errand behind the inn, one of the drunkards lurched forward as if to attack and fell prone. A stone or two was thrown, but Alastair showed his pistols, and that form of assault was dropped. The crowd became stagnant, but it did not disperse.</p>
			<p>“I must get on to Flambury,” Alastair told his neighbours. “I cannot wait all day here. There is nothing for it but that you go with me. My pistols will get us a passage to my horse yonder, and we can ride and tie.”</p>
			<p>The plan was never put into action. For at the moment from a window over their heads descended a shower of red-hot embers. All three leaped forward to avoid a scorching and so moved outside the protecting side wall. Then, neatly and suddenly, the little man called Bill was plucked up and hustled into the crowd. Alastair could not fire or draw upon a circle of gaping faces. He looked furiously to his right, when a cry on his left warned him that the Methody also had gone.</p>
			<p>But him he could follow, for he saw the boots of him being dragged inside the inn door. Clearing his way with his sword, he rushed thither, stumbling over the greyhound and with a kick sending it flying. There were three steps to the door, and as he mounted them he obtained a view over the heads of the mob and down the village street. He saw his horse still peacefully tethered to the signpost, and beyond it there came into view a mounted troop clattering up the cobbles.</p>
			<p>The door yielded to his foot and he received in his arms the Methody, who seemed to have made his escape from his captors. “They’ve got Bill in the cellar,” he gasped. “It’s that Gypsy Ben.” And then he was stricken dumb at something which he saw below Alastair’s armpits.</p>
			<p>The crowd had scattered and its soberer members now clustered in small knots with a desperate effort at nonchalance. Opposite the inn door horsemen had halted, and the leader, a tall man with the black military cockade in his hat, was looking sternly at the group, till his eye caught the Methody. “Ha! Sewell,” he cried, and the Methody, stricken into a ramrod, stood erect before him.</p>
			<p>“These are recruits of ours?” he asked. “You have explained to them the new orders?”</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said the ramrod, raising his voice so that all could hear, “I have explained, as in dooty bound, and I ’ave to report that, though naturally disappointed, they bows to orders, all but a gypsy rapscallion, of whom we be well quit. I ’ave likewise to report that Bill and me ’as been much assisted by this gentleman you sees before you, without whom things might ’ave gone ugly.”</p>
			<p>The tall soldier’s eyes turned towards Alastair and he bowed.</p>
			<p>“I am in your debt, sir. General Oglethorpe is much beholden to you.”</p>
			<p>“Nay, sir, as a soldier who chanced upon a difficult situation I had no choice but to lend my poor aid.”</p>
			<p>The General proffered his snuff-box. “Of which regiment?”</p>
			<p>“Of none English. My service has been outside my country, on the continent of Europe. I am born a poor Scottish gentleman, sir, whose sword is his livelihood. They call me Maclean.”</p>
			<p>General Oglethorpe looked up quickly. “A most honourable livelihood. I too have carried my sword abroad⁠—to the Americas, as you may have heard. I was returning thither, but I have been intercepted for service in the North. Will you dine with me, sir? I should esteem your company.”</p>
			<p>“Nay, I must be on the road,” said Alastair. “Already I have delayed too long. I admire your raw material, sir, but I do not covet your task of shaping it to the purposes of war.”</p>
			<p>The General smiled sourly. “In Georgia they would have been good soldiers in a fortnight. Here in England they will be still raw after a year’s campaigning.”</p>
			<p>They parted with elaborate courtesies, and looking back, Alastair saw what had five minutes before been an angry mob falling into rank under General Oglethorpe’s eye. He wondered what had become of Ben the Gypsy.</p>
			<p>Flambury proved but a short two-hours’ journey. It was a large village with a broad street studded with ancient elm trees, and, as Alastair entered it, that street was thronged like a hiring fair. The noise of human voices, of fiddles and tabrets and of excited dogs, had greeted him half a mile off, like the rumour of a battlefield. Wondering at the cause of the din, he wondered more when he approached the houses and saw the transformation of the place. There were booths below the elm trees, protected from possible rain by awnings of sacking, where ribands and crockery and cheap knives were being vended. Men and women, clothed like mummers, danced under the November sky as if it had been May-day. Games of chance were in progress, fortunes were being spae’d, fairings of gingerbread bought, and, not least, horses sold to the accompaniment of shrill cries from stable boys and the whinnyings of startled colts and fillies. The sight gave Alastair a sense of security, for in such an assemblage a stranger would not be questioned. He asked a woman what the stir signified. “Lawk a mussy, where be you borned,” she said, “not to know ’tis Flambury Feast-Day?”</p>
			<p>The Dog and Gun was easy to find. Already the darkness was falling, and while the street was lit with tarry staves, the interior of the hostelry glowed with a hundred candles. The sign was undecipherable in the half light, but the name in irregular letters was inscribed above the ancient door. Alastair rode into a courtyard filled with chaises and farmers’ carts, and having with some difficulty found an ostler, stood over him while his horse was groomed, fed and watered. Then he turned to the house, remembering <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd’s recommendation to the landlord. If that recommendation could procure him some privacy in this visit, fortunate would have been his meeting with the laird of Greyhouses.</p>
			<p>The landlord, discovered not without difficulty, was a lusty florid fellow, with a loud voice and a beery eye. He summoned the traveller into his own parlour, behind the tap-room, from which all day his bustling wife directed the affairs of the house. The place was a shrine of comfort, with a bright fire reflected in polished brass and in bottles of cordials and essences which shone like jewels. The wife at a long table was mixing bowl after bowl of spiced liquors, her face glowing like a moon, and her nose perpetually wrinkled in the task of sniffing odours to detect the moment when the brew was right. The husband placed a red-cushioned chair for Alastair, and played nervously with the strings of his apron. It occurred to the traveller that the man had greeted him as if he had been expected, and at this he wondered.</p>
			<p>The name of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd was a talisman that wrought mightily upon the host’s goodwill, but that good-will was greater than his powers.</p>
			<p>“Another time and the whole house would have been at your honour’s service,” he protested. “But to-day⁠—” and he shrugged his shoulders. “Oh, you shall have a bed, though I have to lie myself on bare boards, but a private room is out of my power. We’ve but the three of them, and they’re all as throng as a bee-hive. There’s Tom Briggs in the Blue Room, celebrating the sale of his string of young horses⁠—an ancient engagement, sir; and there’s the Codgers’ Supper in the Gents’ Attic, and in Shrewsbury there’s five pig dealers sleeping on chairs. That’s so, mother?”</p>
			<p>“Six in Shrewsbury,” said the lady, “and there’s five waiting on the Attic, as soon as the Codgers have supped.”</p>
			<p>“You see, sir, how I’m situated. You’ll have a good bed to yourself, but I fear I must ask you to sup in the bar parlour with the other gentry that’s here to-day. Unless your honour would prefer the kitchen?” he added hopefully.</p>
			<p>Alastair, who had a vision of a company of drunken squirelings of an inquisitive turn, announced that he would greatly prefer the kitchen. The decision seemed to please the landlord.</p>
			<p>“There’s a good fire and not above half a dozen for company at present. Warm yourself there, sir, and your supper will be ready before your feet are comforted. A dish of pullets and eggs, mutton chops, a prime ham, a good cut of beef, and the best of double Gloucester. What say you to that now? And for liquor a bowl of mother’s spiced October, with a bottle of old port to go with the cheese.”</p>
			<p>Alastair was hungry enough to approve of the lot, and tired and cold enough to welcome the chance of a roaring kitchen hearth. In the great shadowy place, the rafters loaded with hams and the walls bright with warming-pans, there was only a handful of topers, since the business out-of-doors was still too engrossing. The landlord was as good as his word, and within half an hour the traveller was sitting down to a most substantial meal at the massive board. The hostess’s spiced October was delicate yet potent, the port thereafter⁠—of which the host had a couple of glasses⁠—a generous vintage. The young man at length drew his chair from the table to the fireside and stretched his legs to the blaze, replete and comfortable in body, and placid, if a little hazy, in mind.⁠ ⁠… Presently the leaping flames of the logs took odd shapes; the drone of voices from the corner became surf on a shore: he saw a fire on a beach and dark hills behind it, and heard the soft Gaelic of his kin.⁠ ⁠… His head nodded on his breast and he was sound asleep.</p>
			<p>He woke to find an unpleasant warmth below his nose and to hear a cackle as of a thousand geese in his ears. Something bright and burning was close to his face. He shrank from it and at once sprawled on his back, his head bumping hard on the stone floor.</p>
			<p>The shock thoroughly awakened him. As he sprang to his feet he saw a knot of flushed giggling faces. One of the group had been holding a red-hot poker to his face, while another had drawn away the chair from beneath him.</p>
			<p>His first impulse was to buffet their heads, for no man is angrier than a sleeper rudely awakened. The kitchen was now crowded, and the company seemed to appreciate the efforts of the practical jokers, for there was a roar of applause and shouts of merriment. The jokers, who from their dress were hobbledehoy yeomen or small squires, were thus encouraged to continue, and, being apparently well on the way to drunkenness, were not disposed to consider risks. Two of them wore swords, but it was clear that the sword was not their weapon.</p>
			<p>Alastair in a flaming passion had his hand on his blade, when his arm was touched from behind and a voice spoke. “Control your temper, sir, I beseech you. This business is premeditated. They seek to fasten a quarrel on you. Don’t look round. Smile and laugh with them.”</p>
			<p>The voice was familiar though he could not put a name to it. A second glance at the company convinced him that the advice was sound and he forced himself to urbanity. He took his hand from his sword, rubbed his eyes like one newly awakened, and forced a parody of a smile.</p>
			<p>“I have been asleep,” he stammered. “Forgive my inattention, gentlemen. You were saying⁠ ⁠… Ha ha! I see! A devilish good joke, sir. I dreamed I was a blacksmith and woke to believe I had fallen in the fire.”</p>
			<p>The hobbledehoys were sober enough to be a little nonplussed at this reception of their pleasantry. They stood staring sheepishly, all but one who wore a mask and a nightcap, as if he had just come from a mumming show. To judge by his voice he seemed older than the rest.</p>
			<p>“Tell us your dreams,” he said rudely. “From your talk in your sleep they should have been full of treason. Who may you be, sir?”</p>
			<p>Alastair, at sight of a drawer’s face round the corner of the tap-room door, called for a bowl of punch.</p>
			<p>“Who am I?” he said quietly. “A traveller who has acquired a noble thirst, which he would fain share with other good fellows.”</p>
			<p>“Your name, my thirsty friend?”</p>
			<p>“Why, they call me Watson⁠—Andrew Watson, and my business is to serve his Grace of Queensberry, that most patriotic nobleman.” He spoke from a sudden fancy, rather than from any purpose; it was not likely that he could be controverted, for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd was now posting into Wiltshire.</p>
			<p>His questioner looked puzzled, but it was obvious that the name of a duke, and Queensberry at that, had made an impression upon the company. The man spoke aside with a friend, and then left the kitchen. This was so clear a proof that there had been purpose in his baiting that Alastair could have found it in him to laugh at such clumsy conspirators. Somehow word had been sent of his coming, and there had been orders to entangle him; but the word had not been clear and his ill-wishers were still in doubt about his identity. It was his business in no way to enlighten them, but he would have given much to discover the informant.</p>
			<p>He had forgotten about the mentor at his elbow. Turning suddenly, he was confronted with the queer figure of the tutor of Chastlecote, who was finishing a modest supper of bread and cheese at the main table. The man’s clothes were shabbier than ever, but his face and figure were more wholesome than at Cornbury. His cheeks had a faint weathering, his neck was less flaccid, and he held himself more squarely. As Alastair turned, he also swung round, his left hand playing a tattoo upon his knee. His eye was charged with confidences.</p>
			<p>“We meet again,” he whispered. “Ever since we parted I have had a premonition of this encounter. I have much for your private ear.”</p>
			<p>But it was not told, for the leader of the hobbledehoys, the fellow with the mask and nightcap, was again in the kitchen. It looked as if he had been given instructions by someone, for he shouted, as a man does when he is uncertain of himself and would keep up his courage.</p>
			<p>“Gentlefolk all, there are vipers among us to-night. This man who calls himself a duke’s agent, and the hedge schoolmaster at his elbow. They are naught but lousy Jacobites and ’tis our business as good Englishmen to strip and search them.”</p>
			<p>The others of his party cried out in assent, and there was a measure of support from the company at large. But before a man could stir the tutor spoke.</p>
			<p>“Bad law!” he said. “I and, for all I know, the other gentleman are inoffensive travellers moving on our lawful business. You cannot lay hand on us without a warrant from a justice. But, sirs, I am not one to quibble about legality. This fellow has insulted me grossly and shall here and now be brought to repentance. Put up your hands, you rogue.”</p>
			<p>The tutor had suddenly become a fearsome figure. He had risen from his chair, struggled out of his coat, and, blowing like a bull, was advancing across the floor on his adversary, his great doubled fists held up close to his eyes. The other gave ground.</p>
			<p>“I do not fight with scum,” he growled. But as the tutor pressed on him, his hand went to his sword.</p>
			<p>He was not permitted to draw it. “You will fight with the natural weapon of Englishmen,” his assailant cried, and caught the sword strap and broke it, so that the weapon clattered into a corner and its wearer spun round like a top. The big man seemed to have the strength of a bull. “Put up your hands,” he cried again, “or take a coward’s drubbing.”</p>
			<p>The company was now in high excitement, and its sympathies were mainly against the challenged. Seeing this, he made a virtue of necessity, doubled his fists, ducked and got in a blow on the tutor’s brisket. The latter had no skill, but immense reach and strength and the uttermost resolution. He simply beat down the other’s guard, reckless of the blows he received, and presently dealt him such a clout that he measured his length on the floor, whence he rose sick and limping and departed on the arm of a friend. The victor, his cheeks mottled red and grey and his breath whistling like the wind in a chimney, returned amid acclamation to the fireside, where he accepted a glass of Alastair’s punch.</p>
			<p>For a moment the haggardness was wiped from the man’s face, and it shone with complacence. His eyes shot jovial but martial glances at the company.</p>
			<p>“We have proved our innocence,” he whispered to Alastair. “Had you used sword or pistol you would have been deemed spy and foreigner, but a bout of fisticuffs is the warrant of the true-born Englishman.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
