<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>VII</h2>
				<h3>How a Man May Hunt with the Hounds and Yet Run with the Hare</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The butler Giles conducted him through long corridors to the door which separated the manor proper from its ancient Edwardian tower, and then up stone stairways to a room under the roof which had once been the sleeping apartment of the lord of the castle. The walls were two yards thick, the windows mere slits for arrows, the oaken floor as wavy as a ploughland. He had refused supper and asked only peace to collect his wits. Giles set a candle down on an oak table, and nodded to a cavernous canopied bed. “There’s blankets enow to keep you warm, since the night be mild for the time o’ year. Good sleep to ye and easy dreams.” The key turned in the lock, and the shuffle of heelless shoes died on the stair.</p>
			<p>Alastair flung himself on the bed, and lay staring at the roof of the canopy, fitfully illumined by the dancing candle. A light wind must have crept into the room from some cranny of the windows, for the flame flickered and queer shadows chased each other over the dark walls. He was in a torment of disquietude since hearing the warrant⁠—not for his own safety, for he did not despair of giving these chaw-bacons the slip, but for the prospects of the Cause. There was black treason somewhere in its innermost councils. The man who had betrayed every danger-point in his own career could do the same thing for others. The rogue⁠—Kyd’s servant or whoever he might be⁠—was in the way of knowing the heart of every secret. Kyd, charged with a most vital service on which the future of England hung, had this Judas always at his elbow to frustrate or falsify any message to the North, to play the devil with the Prince’s recruiting, and at the end to sell his master’s head for gold. The thought made the young man dig his nails into his palms. God’s pity that in an affair so gossamer-fine there should be this rude treachery to rend the web.⁠ ⁠… But if the miscreant was Kyd’s servant, how came he in this neighbourhood? Had he been dismissed Kyd’s service? Or was Kyd himself at hand and the journey into Wiltshire relinquished? His mind was in utter confusion.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless the discovery had quickened his spirit, which of late he thought had been growing languid. He was a campaigner, and made his plans quick. His immediate duty was to escape, his next to reach the Prince and concert measures to meet the case of West England. Fortunate for him that the letter of Brother Gilly had fallen into his hand, for now he knew the magnitude of the business. But first he must sleep, for all evening he had been nodding. He had the soldier’s trick of snatching odd hours of slumber, so, drawing a blanket round him and resolutely shutting off all thoughts, he was soon unconscious.</p>
			<p>He slept lightly, and woke to see the candle, which he had left burning, guttering over the edge of the iron candlestick. A swift shadow ran across the wall before him, and a sudden waft of air caused the candle-end to flare like a torch. He glanced at the door, and it seemed to move. Then the place was quiet again, but it was brighter, for a new light had come into it. He scrambled from the bed to see the glow of a shaded lantern, and a slim cloaked figure slipping the key from the door.</p>
			<p>The lantern was set beside the candle on the table. The figure wore a furred bed-gown and a nightcap of lace and pink satin, and its brown eyes in the shadow were bright as a squirrel’s and very merry.</p>
			<p>“La, la, such a commotion ere I could come to you, sir,” she said. “Giles must carry Nunkie to bed and hoist Squire Bretherton and Sir Ambrose on their horses, and get a message from me to Black Ben, and pass a word to Stable Bill about Moonbeam. You have slept, wise man that you are? But it is time to be about your business of escaping, for in three hours it will be daylight.”</p>
			<p>She was like a pixie in the half darkness, a tall pixie, that had a delicious small stammer in its speech. Alastair was on his feet now, bowing awkwardly.</p>
			<p>“Tell me,” she whispered. “The warrant is true? You are Alastair Maclean, a captain in Lee’s Regiment of France, and a messenger from the Prince in Scotland. Oh, have no fear of me, for I am soul and body for the Cause.”</p>
			<p>“The warrant spoke truly,” he said.</p>
			<p>“And you will join the Prince at the first possible moment? How go things in the North? Have you any news, sir?”</p>
			<p>“The Prince crossed the Border yesterday. He marches to Lancashire.”</p>
			<p>She twined her fingers in excitement. “You dare not delay an hour. And you shall not. I have made everything ready. Sir, you will find I have made everything ready. See, you shall follow me downstairs and Giles will be waiting. The lock of your door fits badly, for the wood around is worm-eaten. To-morrow it will be lying on the floor, to show my uncle how you escaped. Giles will take you by a private way to the Yew Avenue, and there Bill from the stables will await you with Moonbeam saddled and ready⁠—my uncle’s favourite, no less. You will ride down the avenue very carefully, keeping on the grass and making no sound, till you reach the white gate which leads to Wakehurst Common. There Ben will meet you and guide you out of this county so that by the evening you may be in Cheshire.”</p>
			<p>“Ben the Gypsy?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“The same. Do you know him? He is on our side and does many an errand for me.”</p>
			<p>“But, madam, what of yourself? What will your uncle say when he finds his horse gone?”</p>
			<p>“Stolen by the gypsies⁠—I have the story pat. There will be a pretty hue and cry, but Ben will know of its coming and take precautions. I am grieved to tell fibs, but needs must in the day of war.”</p>
			<p>“But I leave you alone to face the consequences.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, do not concern yourself for me. My dear uncle is indulgent and, though a Whig, is no bigot. He will not grieve for your absence at breakfast to-morrow. But I fear the loss of Moonbeam will put him terribly out, and I should be obliged if you could find some way of restoring his horse when his purpose is served. As for myself, I propose leaving this hospitable house no later than to-morrow and journeying north into Derbyshire. I will take <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Johnson with me as company and protector, and I have also my servants from Weston.”</p>
			<p>She spoke with the air of a commander-in-chief, an air so mature and mistressly that it betrayed her utter youth.</p>
			<p>“I am most deeply beholden to you, my lady,” said Alastair. “You know something of me, and I will beg in return some news of my benefactress. You are my lady Norreys?”</p>
			<p>The matronly airs fled and she was a shy child again.</p>
			<p>“I am m‑my lady,” she stammered, “this week back. How did you know, sir? The faithful Puffin? My dear Sir John has gone north to join his Prince, by whose side you will doubtless meet him. Tell him I too have done my humble mite of service to the Cause, and that I am well, and happy in all things but his absence.⁠ ⁠… See, I have written him a little letter which will serve equally to present you to him and to assure him of my love. He is one of you⁠—one of the trusted inner circle, I mean.” She lowered her voice. “He bears the name of <i>Achilles</i>.”</p>
			<p>The hazel eyes had ceased to sparkle and become modest and dim.</p>
			<p>“Tell me one thing, my lady, before I go. My mission to the South was profoundly secret, and not four men in the Prince’s army knew of it. Yet I find myself and my doings set forth in a justice’s warrant as if I had cried them in the streets. There is a traitor abroad and if he goes undetected he spells ruin to our Cause. Can you help me to unearth him?”</p>
			<p>She wrinkled her brows and narrowed her startled eyes.</p>
			<p>“I cannot guess. Save you and Sir John I have seen no professor of our faith. Stay, who was the mummer last night in the Justice Room?”</p>
			<p>“Some common jackal of Hanover. No, the danger is not there. But, madam, you have a quick brain and a bold heart. If you can lay your finger on this fount of treason, you will do a noble work for our Prince. Have you the means to send a message to the North?”</p>
			<p>She nodded. “Assuredly⁠—by way of Sir John.⁠ ⁠… But you must start forthwith, sir. I will take your mails into Derbyshire in my charge, for you must ride fast and light. Now, follow me, and tread softly when I lift my hand.”</p>
			<p>Down the long stone stairs the lantern fluttered, and at a corner the man who followed caught a glimpse of bare rosy ankles above the furred slippers. In the manor galleries, where oaken flooring creaked, a hand was now and then raised to advise caution. Once there came the slamming of a door, and the lantern-bearer froze into stillness behind an armoire, while Alastair, crouched beside her, felt the beating of her heart. But without mishap they reached the Great Hall, where the last red embers crackled fitfully and a cricket ticked on the hearthstone. Through a massive door they entered another corridor and the girl whistled long and soft. The answer was a crack of light from a side door, and Giles appeared, cloaked like a conspirator and carrying a pewter candlestick. Gone was the decorum of the butler who had set the stage in the Justice Room, and it was a nervous furtive old serving-man who received the girl’s instructions.</p>
			<p>“Oh, my lady, I’m doing this for your mother’s sake, her as I used to make posies for when I was no more’n buttery lad. But my knees do knock together cruel, for what Squire would say if he knew makes my blood freeze to think on.”</p>
			<p>“Now, don’t be a fool, Giles. I can manage your master, and you have nothing to do but lead this gentleman to the Yew Avenue, and then back to your bed with a clear conscience.”</p>
			<p>She laid a hand on the young man’s arm⁠—the gesture with which a boy encourages a friend.</p>
			<p>“Adieu, sir, and I pray God that He lead you swift and straight to your journey’s end. I will be in Derbyshire⁠—at Brightwell under the Peak, waiting to bid you welcome when you come south to the liberation of England.” He took her hand, kissed it, and, with a memory of wistful eyes and little curls that strayed from her cap’s lace and satin, he followed the butler through the kitchen postern into the gloom of the night.</p>
			<p>A short and stealthy journey among shrubberies brought them to a deeper blackness which proved to be a grove of yews. Something scraped and rustled close ahead, and the hoarse whisper of Giles received a hoarse answer. The night was not so dark as to hide objects outside the shade of the trees, and on a patch of grass Alastair made out a horse with a man beside it. Bill the stableman put the bridle into his hand, after making certain by a word with Giles that he was the person awaited. Alastair found a guinea for each, and before their muttered thanks were done was in the saddle, moving, as he had been instructed, into the blackness of the great avenue.</p>
			<p>The light mouth, the easy paces, the smooth ripple of muscle under his knees told him that he was mounted on no common horse, but his head was still too full of his late experience to be very observant about the present. The nut-brown girl, the melodious voice with a stammer like a break in a nightingale’s song, seemed too delicious and strange for reality. And yet she was flesh and blood; he had felt her body warm against his when they sheltered behind the armoire: it was her doing that he was now at liberty and posting northward. Now he understood <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Johnson’s devotion. To serve such a lady he would himself scale the blue air and plough the high hills, as the bards sang.</p>
			<p>The bemusement took him down the avenue till the trees thinned out and on the right came the ghostly glimmer of a white gate. He turned and found it open, and by it another horseman.</p>
			<p>“The gentleman from Miss Claudy⁠—beg y’r pardon⁠—from m’lady?” a voice asked.</p>
			<p>“The same,” Alastair replied. The speech was that of the gypsy he had met the day before.</p>
			<p>The man shut the gate with his whip. “Then follow me close and not a cheep o’ talk. We’ve some cunning and fast journeying to do before the day breaks.”</p>
			<p>They swept at a canter down a long lane, deeply rutted, and patched here and there with clumps of blackberries. Then they were on a heath, where the sky was lighter and the road had to be carefully picked round sandpits and quarry-holes. Alastair had no guess at direction, for the sky showed never a star, and though the dark was not impenetrable it was hopeless to look for landmarks. A strange madcap progress they made over every kind of country, now on road, now in woodland, now breasting slopes of heath with the bracken rubbing on the stirrups. Oftenest they were in forest land, where sometimes there was no path and Alastair found it best to give his horse its head and suffer it to do the steering. He had forgotten that England could be so wild, for these immense old boles and the miles of thicket and mere belonged surely to a primeval world. Again the course would be over fallow and new plough, and again in lanes and parish roads and now and then on the turnpike. The pace was easy⁠—a light canter, but there were no halts, and always ahead over hedge and through gap went the slim figure of the gypsy.</p>
			<p>The air was chilly but not cold, and soon the grey cloth of darkness began to thin till it was a fine veil dimming but not hiding objects, and the light wind blew which even on the stillest night heralds the dawn. The earth began to awake, lights kindled in farms and cottages, lanterns flickered around steadings. Movement through this world just struggling out of sleep was a joy and an exhilaration. It reminded Alastair of a winter journey from Paris to Beauvais⁠—part of a Prince’s wager⁠—when with relays of horses he had ridden down the night, through woods and hamlets dumb with snow, intoxicated with his youth, and seeing mystery in every light that glimmered out of the dark. Now he was in the same mood. His spirits rose at the signs of awaking humanity. That lantern by a brook was a shepherd pulling hay for the tups now huddled in the sheep-cote. The light at that window was the goodwife grilling bacon for the farmer’s breakfast, or Blowselinda of the Inn sweeping the parlour after the night’s drinking. And through that homely ritual of morn he was riding north to the Wars which should upturn thrones and make nobles of plain captains. Youth! Romance! And somewhere in the background of his brain a voice sounded like a trill of music. “Adieu, sir. I pray God⁠ ⁠… I go to B-Brightwell under the P-Peak⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The light had grown and he had his first view of Black Ben, and Ben of him. They jostled at a gate and stared at each other.</p>
			<p>“We meet again,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Happy meeting, my dear good gentleman. But you were on a different errand yesterday when my duty drove me the way of hot ashes. No offence took along of a poor man’s honesty, kind sir?”</p>
			<p>“None,” said Alastair. He saw now the reason for the gypsy’s presence with the recruits. He was in Jacobite pay, hired to scatter Oglethorpe’s levies and so reduce Wade’s command. But none the less he disliked the man⁠—his soft sneering voice, and the shifty eyes which he remembered from yesterday.</p>
			<p>It was now almost broad day, about eight in the morning, and Alastair reckoned that they must have travelled twenty miles and be close on the Cheshire border. The country was featureless⁠—much woodland interspersed with broad pastures, and far to the east a lift of ground towards a range of hills. The weather was soft and clear, a fine scenting morning for the hunt, and far borne on the morning air came the sound of a horn.</p>
			<p>The gypsy seemed to be at fault. He stopped and considered for a matter of five minutes with his ear cocked. Then he plunged into a copse and emerged in a rushy bottom between high woods. Here the sound of the horn was heard again, apparently from the slopes at the end of the bottom.</p>
			<p>“The turnpike runs yonder at the back of the oak clump,” he said. “Best get to it by the brook there and the turf bridge. I must leave you, pretty gentleman. You take the left turn and hold on, and this night you will sleep in Warrington.”</p>
			<p>They were jogging towards the brook when Alastair took a fancy to look back, and saw between the two woods a tiny landscape neatly framed in the trees. There was a church tower in it, and an oddly shaped clump of ashes. Surely it was familiar.</p>
			<p>Across the brook the hunting horn sounded again, this time from beyond a spinney at the top of the slope.</p>
			<p>“There lies your road, pretty sir,” and the gypsy pointed to the left of the spinney and wheeled his horse to depart.</p>
			<p>But Alastair was looking back again. The higher ground of the slope gave him a wider prospect, and he saw across one of the enclosing woods the tall chimneys of a great house. That did not detain his eye, which was caught by something beyond. There on a low ridge was sprawled a big village with square-towered church and a blur of smoke above the line of houses. England must be a monotonous land, for this village of Cheshire was the very image of Flambury, and the adjacent mansion might have been Squire Thicknesse’s manor.</p>
			<p>At the same moment the music of hounds crashed from the spinney ahead, and a horn was violently blown. Round the edge of the spinney came the hunt, and the pack was spilled out of its shade like curds from a broken dish. The sight, novel in his experience, held him motionless. He saw the huntsman struggling with outrunners, and the field, urged on by the slope, crowding on the line. In the rear he saw a figure which was uncommonly like the magistrate who had presided last night in the Justice-room. As he observed these things he realised that his twenty miles of the morning had been a circuit, and that he was back now at the starting-point, mounted on a stolen horse, and within a hundred yards of the horse’s owner. The gypsy had set spurs to his beast and was disappearing round the other end of the spinney, and even in the hubbub of the hunt he thought he detected the man’s mocking laugh.</p>
			<p>To hesitate was to be lost, and there was but the one course open. A tawny streak had slid before the hounds towards the brook. That must be the fox, and if he were not to become the quarry in its stead he must join in the chase. The huntsman was soon twenty yards from him, immediately behind the hounds, and fifty yards at his back came the van of the field. In that van he could see Squire Thicknesse mounted on a powerful grey, and he seemed to have eyes only for the hounds. Alastair cut in well behind him, in the hope that he would be taken for a straggler at covert-side, and in three seconds was sweeping forward in the second flight.</p>
			<p>The morning’s ride had been for Moonbeam no more than a journey to the meet, and the beautiful animal now laid back his ears and settled down to his share in that game which he understood as well as any two-legged mortal. But in the very perfection of the horse lay the rider’s peril. Moonbeam was accustomed to top the hunt, for Squire Thicknesse was famed over three shires as a good goer. He would not be content to travel a field or two behind hounds; he must keep them company. Alastair found that no checking could restrain his mount. The animal was lightly bitted and he had not the skill or the strength to hold him back. True, he could have swerved and fetched a wide circuit, but in that first rush these tactics did not suggest themselves, and he set himself to a frantic effort at reining in, in which he was worsted. Moonbeam crossed the brook like a swallow; in a boggy place he took off badly, topped an ox-bar in the hedge, and all but fell on his nose in the next meadow. But after that he made no mistake, and in five minutes Alastair found himself looking from ten yards’ distance at the broad back of the huntsman, with no rider near him except Squire Thicknesse on the grey.</p>
			<p>The going was good over old pasture, and the young man had leisure to recover his breath and consider his position. He had hunted buck in France⁠—stately promenades in the forests of Fontainebleau and Chantilly, varied by mad gallops along grassy rides where the only risk was the cannoning with other cavaliers. But this chase of the fox was a very different matter, the glory of it went to his head like strong wine, and he would not have cried off if he could. So far he was undiscovered. Were the fumes of last night’s revel still in the Squire’s head, or had he never meant to ride Moonbeam that day and his groom kept the loss from him? Crossing a thickset hedge neck by neck, Alastair stole a glance at him, and decided that the former explanation was the true one. His late host was still in the process of growing sober.⁠ ⁠… It could not last for ever. Sooner or later must come a check or a kill, when he would have a chance to look at his neighbour and his neighbour’s horse⁠ ⁠… Then he must ride for it, become himself the fox, and trust to Moonbeam. Pray God that the run took them to the north and ended many miles from Flambury.</p>
			<p>For the better part of an hour hounds ran without a check⁠—away from the enclosed fields and the woodlands to a country of furzy downs and bracken-filled hollows, and then once more into a land of tangled thickets. It took about twenty minutes to clear Squire Thicknesse’s brain. Alastair heard a sudden roar behind him and looked over his shoulder to see a furious blue eye fixed on him, and to hear a bellow of⁠—“Damme, it’s my horse. It’s my little Moonbeam!” He saw a whip raised, and felt it swish a foot from his leg. There was nothing for it but to keep his distance from the wrathful gentleman, and so gallantly did Moonbeam respond that he was presently at the huntsman’s elbow.</p>
			<p>Had he known it, the grey was the faster of the two, though lacking Moonbeam’s sweet paces and lionlike heart. His enemy was up on him at once, and it looked as if there was nothing before him but to override hounds. But the discipline of the sport was stronger than a just wrath. The Squire took a pull on the grey and drew back. He was biding his time.</p>
			<p>Alastair seized the first chance, which came when hounds were engulfed in a wide wood of oaks on the edge of a heath. Taking advantage of a piece of thick cover, he caught Moonbeam by the head and swung him down a side glade. Unfortunately he was observed. An oath from Squire Thicknesse warned him that that sportsman had forgone the pleasure of being in at the death for the satisfaction of doing justice on a horse-thief.</p>
			<p>Now there was no hunt etiquette to be respected. The grey’s hooves spurned the rotten woodland turf, and pursuer and pursued crashed into a jungle of dry bulrushes and sallows. Alastair was saved by the superior agility of his horse, which could swerve and pivot where the heavier grey stumbled. He gained a yard or two, then a little more by a scramble through a gap, and a crazy scurry down a rabbit track.⁠ ⁠… He saw that his only chance was to slip off, for Moonbeam had the madness of the chase on him, and if left riderless would rejoin the hounds. So when he had gained some forty yards and was for the moment out of the Squire’s sight, he took his toes from the stirrups and flung himself into a bed of bracken. He rolled over and over into a dell, and when he came to a halt and could look up he saw the grey’s stern disappearing round the corner, and heard far off the swish and crash of Moonbeam’s flight.</p>
			<p>Not a second was to be lost, for the Squire would soon see that the rider had gone and turn back in the search for him. Alastair forced his stiff legs to a run, and turned in the direction which he thought the opposite of that taken by hounds. Up a small path he ran, among a scrub of hazels and down into a desert of red bracken and sparse oak trees. The noises in the wood grew fainter, and soon his steps were the loudest sound, his steps and the heavy flight of an occasional scared pigeon. He ran till he had put at least a mile of rough land behind him, and had crossed several tracks, which would serve to mislead the pursuit. Lacking a bloodhound, it would not be easy to follow his trail. Then in a broader glade he came upon a thatched hovel, such as foresters and charcoal-burners use when they have business abroad in the night hours.</p>
			<p>Alastair crept up to it cautiously, and through a crack surveyed the interior. His face hardened and an odd light came into his eye. He strode to the door and pushed the crazy thing open.</p>
			<p>Within, breakfasting on a hunch of bread and cheese, sat the man Edom, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kyd’s servant.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
